# Intrusion_Detection_Using_Log_Files

Intrusion detection is defined as, "The task of detecting and responding to the computer misuse by detecting unauthorized access to a computer network". Intrusion detection system is the system that collects information from a variety of systems and network sources and then analyses the information for signs of intrusion and misuse. IDS are used to supervise and assay the activities of the user and the system, examine policy violation by user, to recognize patterns of typical attack, analysis of system configuration, file integrity and abnormal activity patterns.

Characteristics of IDS
Some of the characteristics of good intrusion detection systems:
1. Timeliness: Ability to detect the attack when it is occurring or quickly after that.
2. High probability of detection: The IDS must be capable of detecting significant types of attack.
3. Low False alarm rate: The IDS should have a low false alarm rate.
4. Scalability: Ability to work with wide network involving large number of components.
5. Low a priori information: The IDS should require little or no advance information about potential attacks and their methods.

The goal of using a layered model is to reduce computation and the overall time required to detect anomalous events. The time required to detect an intrusive event is significant and can be reduced by eliminating the communication overhead among different layers. This can be achieved by making the layers autonomous and self-sufficient to block an attack without the need of a central decision-maker. Every layer in the LIDS framework is trained separately and then deployed sequentially. We define four layers that correspond to the four attack groups mentioned in the data set. They are Probe layer, DoS layer, R2L layer, and U2R layer. Each layer is then separately trained with a small set of relevant features. Feature selection is significant for Layered Approach and discussed in the next section. In order to make the layers independent, some features may be present in more than one layer. The layers essentially act as filters that block any anomalous connection, thereby eliminating the need of further processing at subsequent layers enabling quick response to intrusion. The effect of such a sequence of layers is that the anomalous events are identified and blocked as soon as they are detected.
The second goal is to improve the speed of operation of the system. Hence, we implement the LIDS and select a small set of features for every layer rather than using all the 41 features. This results in significant performance improvement during both the training and the testing of the system. In many situations, there is a trade-off between efficiency and accuracy of the system and there can be various avenues to improve system performance. Methods such as naive Bayes assume independence among the observed data. This certainly increases system efficiency, but it may severely affect the accuracy. To balance this trade-off, we use the CRFs that are more accurate, though expensive, but we implement the Layered Approach to improve overall system performance. The performance of our proposed system,
Layered CRFs, is comparable to that of the decision trees and the naive Bayes, and our system has higher attack detection accuracy.
